Now that we have learned strategies for building the data science team,
we turn our attention to managing the data science process.
In this section, I discussed
several alternative project management paradigms
that are used to manage the data science process.
Many data science and engineering projects are
initially managed using a unidirectional approach.
This is generally known as
waterfall management due to the unidirectionality of a waterfall.
Projects pass through various stages from
conception to implementation, and ultimately maintenance.
Before the project is launched,
requirements are specified using a product requirements document.
Software architecture is designed in a second design stage,
and then the software is built and implemented during an implementation stage.
Once complete, the correct operation of
software is verified through a verification stage,
and the software is ultimately maintained during a maintenance phase.
While this approach seems very logical, in practice,
data science team initiatives tend not to be linear and unidirectional.
Substantial uncertainty exists throughout the modal data science project,
often requiring multiple iterations and regularly stepping
back one or two steps in order to move forward towards successful completion.
A popular alternative to waterfall, in fact,
the most popular framework now used in software development is the agile framework.
Since a group of 17 software visionaries penned the Agile Manifesto nearly 20 years ago,
agile methodologies have taken the software development world by storm.
Agile is seen by many as a preferred way to manage projects in small,
workable increments rather than in large stages.
Via agile, projects evolve continuously with
regular evaluation and work divided into consumable increments.
Two popular components of
agile project management include the kanban and scrum frameworks.
In kanban, tasks are represented on a kanban board,
which is a visual representation of work tasks and their status towards completion.
In scrum, work is divided into two-week increments known as sprints,
and assigned via points that reflect levels of effort required for completion.
One challenge to managing data science work via sprints is that
data science tasks tend to have
greater uncertainty than traditional software development task,
and are thus harder to manage in two-week increments.
Data science teams often evolve from waterfall to the agile paradigm by
slowly adopting components of agile into their waterfall process workflows.
They may institute a daily scrum meeting,
for example, or begin to organize efforts into biweekly sprints.
This intermediate step has been called wagile by some.
Often, wagile moves from initially reflecting
mostly waterfall concepts to a progressive adoption of
components of the agile paradigm until
project management increasingly resembles pure agile development.
In my own teams, I have managed towards a combination of the two in a way that
also follows from another goal setting strategy known as OKRs,
or Objectives and Key Results.
In my groups, we managed to four levels of goals.
At the highest level, goals,
efforts are organized broadly against the company's broad strategic objectives.
Goals are measured via key results,
measurable outcomes towards which our work is oriented to achieve.
Key results are operationalized into the categories of effort required to achieve them.
These categories are known as epics,
a key unit of work in the agile framework.
Finally, epics are broken down into tasks that are assigned to task leaders.
Tasks represent shorter term activities that can be completed in
one to two weeks by a single person or in some cases by a small team.